CHAPTER XXII 
ARMATURE REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 

192. The change of the terminal voltage of an alternating 
current generator, resulting from a change of load at constant 
field excitation, is due to the combined effect of armature 
reaction and armature self-induction. The counter m.m.f. of 
the armature current, or armature reaction, combines with the 
impressed m.m.f. or field excitation to the resultant m.m.f., 
which produces the resultant magnetic field in the field poles 
and generates in the armature an e.m.f. called the "virtual 
generated e.m.f.," since it has no actual existence, but is merely 
a mathematical fiction. The counter e.m.f. of self-induction of 
the armature current, that is, e.m.f. generated by the armature 
current by a local magnetic flux, combines with the virtual 
generated e.m.f. to the actual generated e.m.f. of the armature, 
which corresponds to the magnetic flux in the armature core. 
This combined with the e.m.f. consumed by the armature resist- 
ance gives the terminal voltage. 

In most cases the effect of armature reaction and of self- 
induction are the same in character, and so both effects usually 
are contracted in one constant; for purposes of design, frequently 
the self-induction is represented by an increase of the armature 
reaction, that is, an effective armature reaction used which com- 
bines the effect of the true armature reaction and the armature 
self-induction. That is, instead of the counter e.m.f. of self- 
induction, a counter m.m.f. is used, which would produce the 
magnetic flux which would generate the e.m.f. of self-induction. 
For theoretical investigations usually the armature reaction is 
represented by an effective self-induction, that is, instead of the 
counter m.m.f. of the armature reaction, the e.m.f. considered, 
which would be generated by the magnetic flux, which the arma- 
ture reaction would produce. That is, both effects are com- 
bined in an effective reactance, the "synchronous reactance." 

While armature reaction and self-inductance are similar in 


ARMATURE REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 273 

effect, in some cases they differ in their action; the e.m.f. of 
self-inductance is instantaneous, that is, appears and disappears 
with the current to which it is due. The effect of the armature 
reaction, however, requires time; the change of the magnetic field 
resulting from the combination of the counter m.m.f. of arma- 
ture reaction with the impressed m.m.f. of field excitation occurs 
gradually, since the magnetic field flux interlinks with the field 
winding, and any sudden change of the field generates an e.m.f. 
in the field circuit, which temporarily increases or decreases the 
field current, and so retards the change of the field flux. So, for 
instance, a sudden increase of load results in a simultaneous 
increase of the counter e.m.f. of self-induction and counter 
m.m.f. of armature reaction. With the armature reaction 
demagnetizing the field, the field flux begins to decrease, and 
thus generates an e.m.f. in the field-exciting circuit, which 
increases the field current and retards the decrease of field 
flux, so that the field flux adjusts itself only gradually to the 
change of circuit conditions, at a rate of speed depending upon 
the constants of the field-exciting circuit, etc. 

The extreme case hereof takes place when suddenly short- 
circuiting an alternator; at the first moment the short-circuit 
current is limited only by the self-inductance, and the magnetic 
field still has full strength, the field-exciting current has greatly 
increased by the e.m.f. generated in the field circuit by the arma- 
ture reaction. Gradually the field-exciting current and there- 
with the field magnetism die down to the values corresponding 
to the short-circuit condition. Thus the momentary short- 
circuit current of an alternator is far greater than the perma- 
nent short-circuit current; many times in a machine of low 
self-induction and high armature reaction, as a low-frequency, 
high-speed alternator of large capacity; relatively little in a 
machine of low armature reaction and high self-induction, as a 
high-frequency unitooth alternator, 

193. Graphically, the internal reactions of the alternating- 
current generator can be represented as follows: 

Let the impressed m.m.f., or field excitation, Fo, be repre- 
sented by the vector OFo, in Fig. 139, chosen for convenience 
as vertical axis. Let the armature current, I, be represented by 
vector 01. This current, /, gives armature reaction Fi = nl, 
where ?i = number of effective turns of the armature, and is repre- 
sented by the vector, OFi, with the two quadrature components, 


274 


ALTERNATING-CURRENT PHENOMENA 


OF' i, in line with the field m.m.f., Oh\ — and usually opposite 
thereto — and OF", in quadrature with OF^. 

OFo combined with OFi gives the resultant m.m.f., OF, with 
the quadrature components, OF' = OFo — 0F\, and OF". 

The m.m.f., OF, produces a magnetic flux, 0$, and this gener- 
ates an e.m.f., OE2, in the armature circuit, 90° behind OF in 
phase, the virtual generated e.m.f. 


Fig. 139. 


The armature self-induction consumes an e.m.f., OE3, 90° 
ahead of the current, thus, subtracted vectorially from OE2, 
gives the actual generated e.m.f., OEi. 

The armature resistance, r, consumes an e.m.f., OEi, in phase 
with the current, which subtracts vectorially from the actual 
generated e.m.f., and thus gives the terminal voltage, OE. 

194. Analytically, these reactions are best calculated by the 
symbolic method. 


ARMATURE REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 275 

Let the impressed m.in.f., or field-excitation, Fo, be chosen as 
the imaginary axis, hence represented by 

^ Fo = + jfo (1) 

Let 

/ = u — ji2 = armature current. (2) 

The m.m.f. of the armature then is 

Fi =nl = nC/i - ji2) (3) 

where 

ji = number of effective armature turns, 

and the resultant m.m.f. then is 

F = Fo + Fi^ jifo - ni^) + mi. (4) 

If, then, 
(P = magnetic permeance of the structure, that is, magnetic 
flux divided by the ampere-turns m.m.f. producing it, 

(P = ^, or, ^ = (9F = j<Pif, - nio) + (Pm'i. (5) 

The e.m.f. generated by the magnetic flux $ in the armature 

is 62 = 2 7r/ncI>10-8, (6) 

where / = frequency. 

Denoting 2 irfn 10 ~ ^ by a we have, (7) 

62 = a $ (8) 

and since the generated e.m.f. is 90° behind the generating flux, in 
symbolic expression, 

E2= - ja^; (9) 

hence, substituting (5) in (9), 

E2 = a(P{fo - ni2) - jaiPnii, . (10) 

the virtual generated e.m.f. 

The e.m.f. consumed by the self-inductive reactance of the 
armature circuit is, 

E3 = jxl = jxii + xi2; (11) 

and therefore, the actual generated e.m.f. 

El = E2 — Es 

= {a(P/o - {a(Pn -{- x)i2} - jii{a(?n + x). (12) 


276 ALTERNATING-CURRENT PHENOMENA 

The e.m.f. consumed by the armature resistance, r, is 
Ei = rl ^ rii — jrii) 
hence, the terminal voltage, 

E = El — Ei 

= ja(P/o - (a(Pn-\-x)i2 — rii\ — j\ii{a(S>n + x) — Hi]. (14) 

195. It is 
/n = field m.m.f. ; hence 

^0 = (P/o = magnetic flux, which would be produced by the 
field excitation, /o, if the magnetic permeance at this m.m.f., /o, 
were the same, (P, as at the m.m.f., F — that is, if the magnetic 
characteristic would not bend between /o and F, due to mag- 
netic saturation, or in other words, when neglecting saturation, 
and therefore eo = a(P/o(15) = e.m.f. generated in the armature 
by the field excitation, when neglecting magnetic saturation, or 
assuming a straight line saturation curve. 

eo is called the ^^ nominal generated e.m.f. of the machine." 

ni = armature m.m.f.; therefore, 
(9ni = magnetic flux produced thereby, and, 
a(9n.i = e.m.f. generated in the armature bj'^ the magnetic flux of 
armature reaction, hence, 

a(Pn = Xi 

= effective reactance, representing the armature reaction, 

and Xo = a(Pn + x (16) 

= synchronous reactance, that is, the effective reactance 

representing the combined effect of armature self-induction and 

armature reaction. 

Substituting (15) and (16) in (14) gives, 

£' = (eo — a:o^2 — rii) — jix^ii — rio) (17) 

It follows herefrom: 

In an alternating-current generator, the combined effect of 
armature reaction and self-induction can be represented by an 
effective reactance, the sijnchronous reactance, Xo, which consists 
of the two components: 

Xo = X -\- xi (18) 

where, 

X = true self-inductive reactance of the armature circuit. 
Xi = a(9n = effective reactance of armature reaction, (19) 


I 


ARMATURE REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 277 

and the nominal generated e.m.f., 

€o = a(Pfo; (15) 

where, 

n = number of armature turns, effective, 

/"o = field excitation, in ampere-turns, 

a = 2TfnlO-\ (7) 

(P = magnetic permeance of the field structure at a magnetic 
flux in the field-poles corresponding to the virtual generated 
e.m.f., E2. 

The introduction of the term "synchronous reactance," Xo, 
and "nominal generated e.m.f.," eo, is hereby justified, when 
dealing with the permanent condition of the electric circuit. 
The case of the transient phenomena of momentary short- 
circuit currents, etc., is discussed in a chapter on "Transient 
Phenomena and Oscillations," section I. 

It must be understood that the "nominal generated e.m.f.," 
Co, in an actual machine, in which the magnetic characteristic 
bends due to the approach to magnetic saturation, is not the 
voltage generated by the field excitation /o at open-circuit, but 
is the voltage which would be generated, if at excitation, /o, the 

magnetic permeance, (P = -^ were the same as at the actual flux 

existing in the machine — that is, if the magnetic characteristic 
would continue in a straight line passing through the origin when 
prolonged. 

The equation (17) may also be written 

E = 60- Zol; (20) 

where, 

Zo = r + jxo = synchronous impedance of the alternator. 

/ = ii - jii, 
or, more generally 

E = Eo- Zol, (22) 

and so is the equation of a circuit, supplied by the e.m.f., Eo, 
with the current, /, over the impedance, Zo, as has been discussed 
in the chapter on resistance, inductive reactance and conden- 
sive reactance. 


278 ALTERNATING-CURRENT PHENOMENA 

An alternator so is equivalent to an e.m.f., Ea, the nominal 
generated e.m.f., supplying current over an impedance, Zo, the 
synchronous impedance. 

196. In theoretical investigations of alternators, the syn- 
chronous reactance, Xo, is usually assumed as constant, and has 
been assumed so in the preceding. 

In reality, however, this is not exactly, and frequently not 
even approximately correct, but the synchronous reactance is 
different in different positions of the armature with regard to the 
field. Since the relative position of the armature to the field 
varies with the armature current, and with the phase angle of 
the armature current, the regulation curve of the alternator, and 
other characteristic curves, when calculated under the assump- 
tion of constant synchronous reactance, Ta&y differ considerably 
from the observed curves, in machines in which the synchronous 
reactance varies with the position of the armature. 

The two components of the synchronous reactance are the self- 
inductive reactance, and the effective reactance of armature 
reaction. The self-inductive reactance represents the e.m.f. 
generated in the armature by the local field produced in the 
armature by the armature current. The magnetic reluctance 
of the self-inductive field of the armature coil, however, is, in 
general, different when this coil stands in front of a field-pole, 
and when it stands midway between two field-poles, and the 
self-inductive reactance so periodically varies, between two 
extreme values, representing respectively the positions of the 
armature coils in front of, and midway between the field-poles, 
that is, pulsates with double frequency, between a value, x' , 
corresponding to the position in front, and a value, x", corre- 
sponding to a position midway between the field-poles. Depend- 
ing upon the structure of the machine, as the angle of the pole 
arc, that is, the angle covered by the pole face, either x' or x" 
may be the larger one. 

The effective reactance of armature reaction, X\, corresponds 
to the magnetic flux, which the armature would produce in the 
field-circuit. With the armature coil facing the field-pole, that 
is, in a nearly closed magnetic field-current, Xi, therefore is 
usually far greater than with the armature coil facing midway 
between the field-poles, in a more or less open magnetic circuit. 
Hence, Xi, also varies between two extreme values, Xi and Xi" , 
corresponding respectively to the position in Hne with, and in 


ARMATURE REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 279 

quadrature with, the field-poles. In this case, usually Xi is 
larger than x/'. 

Since Xi = a(Pn, where (P = magnetic permeance, (P varies 
between (P', corresponding to the position of the armature coil 
opposite the field-poles, and (P", corresponding to the position 
of the armature coil midway between the field-poles. Usually 
(P' is far larger. 

This means that the two components of the resultant m.m.f. 
F: Fi, in line with, and F" in quadrature with, the field-poles, 
act upon magnetic circuits of very different permeance, (P' and 
(P", and the components of magnetic flux, due to F' and F" 
respectively, are 

$' = (P'F' 
$" z= (p"F". 

The two components of magnetic flux, ^' and $", therefore 
are in general, not proportional to their respective m.m.fs. F' and 
F", and the resultant flux, 4>, accordingly is not in fine with the 
resultant m.m.f., F, but differs therefrom in direction, being 
usually nearer to the center line of the field-poles. That is, 
the resultant magnetic flux, <J>, is more nearly in fine with the 
impressed m.m.f. of field excitation, Fo, than the resultant 
m.m.f., F, is — or in other words — the magnetic flux is shifted 
by the armature reaction less than the resultant m.m.f. is shifted. 

197. To consider, in the investigation of the armature reactions 
of an alternator, the difference of the magnetic reluctance of the 
structure in the different directions with regard to the field, that 
is, the effect of the polar construction of the field, or the use of 
definite polar projections in the magnetic field, the reactions 
of the machine must be resolved into two components, one in 
line and the other in quadrature with the center line of the field- 
poles, or the direction of the impressed m.m.f. or field-excitation, 

Fo. 

Denoting then the components in line with the field-poles 
or parallel with the field-excitation, Fo, by prime, as /', F', etc., 
and the components facing midway between the field-poles, or 
in quadrature position with the field-excitation, Fo, by second, 
as /", F", the diagram of the alternator reactions is modified 
from that given in Fig. 139. 

Choosing again, in Fig. 140, the impressed m.m.f. or field- 
excitation, Fo, as vertical vector OFo, the current, 01, consists 


280 


ALTERNATING-CURRENT PHENOMENA 


of the component, 01' , in line with Fq, or vertical, and 01" in 
quadrature with F^, or horizontal. The armature reaction, 
0F\, gives the components, 0F\ and OFi", and the resultant 
m.m.f. therefore consists of two components, OF' = OFq — 
OFi', and OF" = OFi". 


Fig. 140. 

Let now 
(P' = permeance of the field magnetic circuit; 


(23) 


(?" = permeance of the magnetic circuit through the armature 
in quadrature position to the field-poles; (24) 

the components of the resultant magnetic flux are, 

$' = (p'F'^ represented by 0^'; and $" = (P"F", represented 
by Oi", 

and the resultant magnetic flux, by combination of 0$' and 
0^", is 0$, and is not in line with OF, but differs therefrom, 
being usually nearer to OFo- 


ARMATURE REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 281 

The virtual generated e.m.f. is 

E2 = a4>, 

and represented by OE2, 90° behind 0$. 
Let now 

x' = self-inductive reactance of the armature when facing 
the field-poles, and thus corresponding to the compo- 
nent, /', of the current, (25) 
and 

x" = self-inductive reactance of the armature when facing 
midway between the field-poles, and thus corresponding 
to the component, /", of the current. (26) 

Then 

£"3 = xT = e.m.f. consumed by the self-induction of the 
current component, /', 
and 

£"'3 = x"I" = e.m.f. consumed by the self-induction of the 
current component, /". 

£'3 is represented by vector OE's, 90° ahead of 01', and £"'3 is 
represented by vector 0E"3, 90° ahead of 01". The resultant 
e.m.f. of self-induction then is given by the combination of OE'3 
and OE"^, as OEz. It is not 90° ahead of 01, but either more 
or less. In the former case, the self-induction consumes power, 
in the latter case, it produces power. That is, in such an arma- 
ture revolving in the structure of non-uniform reluctance, the 
e.m.f. of self-induction is not wattless, but may represent con- 
sumption, or production of power, as "reaction machine." (See 
"Calculation of Electrical Apparatus.") 

Subtracting vectorially OE3 from the virtual generated e.m.f. 
OEi, gives the actual generated e.m.f., 0E\, and subtracting 
therefrom the e.m.f. consumed by the armature resistance, OEi, 
in phase with the current, 01, gives the terminal voltage, OE. 

198. Here the diagram has been constructed graphically, by 
starting with the field-excitation, Fq, the armature current, /, 
and the phase angle between the armature current, /, and the 
field-excitation, F^ — that is, the angle between the position in 
which the armature current reaches its maximum, and the direc- 
tion of the field-poles. This angle, however, is unknown. Usu- 
ally the terminal voltage, OE, the current, 01, and the angle, 


282 


AL TERN A TING-C URRENT PHENOMENA 


EOI, between current and terminal voltage are given. From 
these latter quantities, however, the diagram cannot be con- 
structed, since the position of the field-excitation, Fo, and so the 
directions, in which the electric quantities have to be resolved 
into components, are still unknown, when starting the construc- 
tion of the diagram. 

That is, as usually, the graphical representation affords an 

insight into the inner relations 
of the phenomena, but not a 
method for their numerical cal- 
culations, and for the latter 
purpose, the symbolic method 
is required. 
Let 

Eo = nominal generated 
e.m.f., or e.m.f. corresponding 
to the field-excitation, Fo, on a 
straight line continuation of the 
magnetic characteristic from the 
actual value of the field onward 


Fig. 141. 


-as shown by Fig, 141. 
The impressed m.m.f., or field excitation, is then given by 


jFo. 


(27) 


Let 


I = I' -\- I" = armature current, (28) 

where the component, /', is in line, the component, /", in quad- 
rature with: jFo. 

If n = number of effective armature turns, the m,m.f. of the 
armature current, /, or the armature reaction, then is 

f 1 = nl, (29) 

with its components, in phase and in quadrature with the field; 

Fx' = nl', 1 

F^." = nI"•,\ 

and the components of the resultant m.m.f. then are 
F' =jFo-^nr, 

F" = nl"; 


(30) 


(31) 


ARMATURE REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 283 

and the resultant 

F = jFo + nl' + nl". (32) 

The components of the magnetic flux, in line and in quadrature 
with jFo, then are 

«!>' = (?'F' 

= (P'iJFo-^nr); (33) 

= (P"nr'; (34) 

hence, the resultant magnetic flux 

$=$' + $" 

= (P'ijFo + nl') + (P"n7" (35) 

The e.m.f. generated by this magnetic flux, 4>, or the virtual 
generated e.m.f. is 

El = — ja^ 

= - a(P'(Fo + jnl') + - 3a(9"nl". (36) 

The e.m.f. consumed by the self-inductive reactance, x' , of 
the current component, /', is, 

E'^ = jxT, (37) 

the e.m.f. consumed by the self-inductive reactance, x" , of the 
current component, I" , is 

E'\ = jx"!", (38) 

and the total e.m.f. consumed by self-induction thus is 

E, =j{x'r+x"n', (39) 

hence, the actual generated e.m.f. 
El = E2 — E3 

= a(P'Fo - jl'{a(9'n + x') - jl"{a(9"n -\- x"). (40) 

The e.m.f. consumed by the resistance, r, is 

£4 = rl 

= rV -F rZ"; (41) 


284 ALTERNATING-CURRENT PHENOMENA 

hence, the terminal voltage of the machine is 

E = El — Ei 

= a(P'Fo - r{r -\- j{a(?'n -\- x')\ - I" {r -}- j {a(P"n + x")}. (42) 

In this equation of the terminal voltage, 

x'o = a(P'n + x', I 
x"o = a(P"n + x", J (43) 

are effective reactances, corresponding to the two quadrature 
positions; that is 

x'o = synchronous reactance corresponding to the position 
of the armature circuit parallel to the field circuit; (44a) 

x"o = synchronous reactance corresponding to the position of 
the armature circuit in quadrature with the field circuit; (446) 

a(P'Fo is the e.m.f. which would be generated by the field 
excitation, Fo, with the permeance, (?', in the direction in which 
the field excitation, Fg, acts, that is 

Eo = a(P'Fo = nominal generated e.m.f. (45) 

and it is: terminal voltage, 

E = Eo- r(r + jVo) - I"{r + jx"o). (46) 

That is, even with an heteroform structure, as a machine 
with definite polar projections, the armature reaction and 
armature self-induction can be combined by the introduction 
of the terms "nominal generated e.m.f." and "synchronous 
reactance," as defined above, except that in this case the syn- 
chronous reactance, Xo, has two different values, .t'o and x"o, 
corresponding respectively to the two main axes of the magnetic 
structure, in line and in quadrature with the field-poles. 

199. In the equation (46), E, Eo, V and 7" are complex 
quantities, and 

I" is in phase with Eo, 

I' is in quadrature behind Eo, and so behind I": 
hence, I' can be represented by 

/' = - jtr\ (47) 


ARMATURE REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 285 
where t = ratio of numerical values of /" and /', that is 

r 

t = jr, = isin d (48) 

and 

6= angle of lag of current, /, behind nominal generated 
e.m.f., Eq. Then 

/ = /' + /"= /"(I - jt), (49) 

or 

I" = rht ^'i '' = YTjt <^°' 

Substituting these values (50) in equation (46) gives 

E=E,- Y^rjt I (^ + .^^''o) - JKr + jx'o) I . (51) 

In this equation, Eo leads I by angle 9. 
Hence^ choosing the current, I, as zero vector, 

/ = i, (52) 

the e.m.f., Eo, which leads i by angle, 6, can be represented bj^ 
Eo = Co (cos d -\-j sin 6), (53) 

or, since by equation (48), 

sin 6 = — . and cos 6 = — , > (54) 

vT-H" vT+T' ^ 

Substituting (52) and (55) in equation (51), gives 

eo Vl + <^ - t { (r + jx"o) - j^ (r + jx'o) } . . 

^ = ^Jt (56) 

Let 

E = e,-\- jei, (57) 

where 

- = tan e', (58) 

ei 

and 

6' = angle of lag of current, i, behind terminal voltage, E, (59) 


286 


ALTERNA TING-C URRENT PHENOMENA 


substituting (57) in (56) and transposing, 

eoVrH'-(ei']-je2){l-jt)-i{(r-\-jx"o)-jt(r-\-jx'o)} = 0, (60) 

or, expanded, 

{eoVl + t^-ei-te2-i{r-htx'o))-\-j{tei-e2 + i(tr-x'\)} =0. (61) 

As the left side is a complex quantity, and equals zero, the real 
part as well as the imaginary part must be zero, and equation (61) 
so resolves into the two equations 


Co VT+I" - e, - ^62 - 4 (r + tx'o) = 0, 
tei — ei -\- i {tr — x'\) = 0. 
From equation (63) follows 


t 


62 + X"oi 


ei + ri 
Substituting (64) in (62), and expanding, gives 

(ei + ny + (62 + x',i) (62 + x"oi) 


60 = 


That is, if 


V{ei + n)2 + (e2 + x"^' 


x'o = synchronous reactance in the direction of the field- 
excitation, 

x"o = synchronous reactance in quadrature with the 
field excitation, 
r = armature resistance, 

i = armature current, 

E = ei -\- je2 ^ e(cos 6' + j sin 6') = terminal voltage, 

that is, 

62 
tan ^' = — = angle of lag of current i behind terminal 

voltage, e, 

the nominal generated e.m.f. of the machine is 

(ei + n)2 -f (ea + x'oi) {e^ + x"oi) 


eo = 


V(ei + n)2+(e2 + a;'V)2 

(e cos e' + ri)^ + (e sin 6' + x'oi) (e sin d' + x"oi) 
Vie cos e' + riy + (e sin 9', + x"o^y 


(62) 
(63) 

(64,^ 
(65) 


(66) 


(67) 


(68) 


ARMATURE REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 287 

and the field excitation, /o, required to give terminal voltage, e, 
at current, i, and angle of lag, 6', is, therefore 

•^'' " a(P'n~27r/n2(P' ^''''^ 

and the position angle, 6, between the field-excitation, /o, and 
the armature current, i, that is, between the direction of the 
field-poles and the direction in which the armature current 
reaches its maximum, is 

€2 + x"oi e sin d' -f x'\i 

tan 9 = t = ; — - = T7-j :-• (7Uj 

ei -\- ri e cos 6 -{- ri 

200. At non-inductive load, 

d = e and ^2 = 0 (71) 

from (68), 

^ (e + n)^ + a^oVV' 

^^ \/(e + n)2+a;Vi'' ^ ^ 

If 

3^ 0 ^^ 3; 0 ^= 3^0, (7 <j) 

that is, the synchronous reactance of the machine is constant in all 
positions of the armature, or in other words, the magnetic per- 
meance, (P, and the self-inductive reactance, x, do not vary with 
the position of the armature in the field, equation (68) assumes 
the form 

eo = V{er-\-ny-^ie2 + x,iy, (74) 

and this is the absolute value of the equation (22) 

^0 = ^ + Zol, (22) 

derived in §195 for the case of uniform synchronous impedance. 
Substituting in (22), 

/ = i, and E = ei -\- je-i, 
and expanding, gives 

^0 = (ei + ie2) + i{r + jx^) 
= (ei + ri) + j{ei -\- Xoi) ; 

thus, the absolute value, 

eo' = (ei + riy + {e^ + Xoi)\ (74) 


288 ALTERNATING-CURRENT PHENOMENA 

201. At short-circuit, and approximately, near short-circuit, 
ei = 0 and ez = 0, (75) 

equation (68) assumes the form 

or the short-circuit current, 


^« = r^ + xWo ' ^^^^ 

Since x'o and x"o usually are large, compared with r, r can be 
neglected in equation (77), and (77) so assumes the form 

io = ^, (78) 

X 0 

that is, the short-circuit current of an alternator, 

• _ ^0 

depends only upon the synchronous reactance of the armature 
in the direction of the field-excitation, x'o, but not upon the syn- 
chronous reactance of the armature in quadrature position to the 
field-excitation, x"o. 

Near open-circuit, that is, in the range where the machine 
regulates approximately for constant potential, and ixo and espe- 
cially ir are small compared with e, we have, for non-inductive 
load, from equation (72), 

(e + nP + xVo«' 


Co = 


x'ox"Qi^ 
= (e -h n) 


^/iT^» 


(e + ri) 2 
or, approximately, 

hence, expanded by the binomial series, 


ARMATURE REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 289 
and, dropping terms of higher order, 

60 = e + n + —^ 2^' 

or, 

. , x'o(2x'o-x"o) P 
eo = e -h ri -\ ^ ^ v'^) 

For x'o = x"o == Xo, this equation (79) assumes the usual form, 

eo = e + n + ^ '-'■ (80) 

In the range near open-circuit, for non-inductive load, the 
regulation of the machine accordingly depends not upon the 
synchronous reactance, x'o, nor upon x"o, but upon the equivalent 
synchronous reactance. 


x'"o - \/^"o(2a;'o -x"o). (81) 

That is, in an alternator with non-uniform synchronous re- 
actance, the short-circuit current and the regulation of the 
machine near short-circuit, depend upon the value of the syn- 
chronous reactance, corresponding to the position of the arma- 
ture coils parallel, or coaxial with the field-poles, x'o, while the 
regulation of the machine for non-inductive load, in the range 
where the machine tends to regulate for approximately constant 
potential, that is, near open-circuit, depends upon the value of 
the synchronous reactance, x"'o = •\/a;"o(2x'n — x"o), where x'o 
and x"o are the two quadrature components of the synchronous 
reactance. 

That is, the regulation of such an alternator of variable syn- 
chronous reactance cannot be calculated from open-circuit 
test and short-circuit test, or from the magnetic characteristic 
of the machine at open-circuit, or nominal generated e.m.f., and 
the synchronous reactance, as given by the machine at short- 
circuit. 

For instance, if 

x'o = 10 and x"o = 4, 

the effective synchronous reactance near short-circuit, 

x'o = 10; 

and the effective synchronous reactance near open-circuit, 


19 


290 ALTERNATING-CURRENT PHENOMENA 

The regulation for non-inductive load thus is better than 
corresponds to the short-circuit impedance. 

From equation (68), by solving for the terminal voltage, e, 
the variation of the terminal voltage, e, with change of load, i, 
at constant field-excitation, /o, and so constant nominal gener- 
ated e.m.f., eo, that is, the regulation curve of the machine, is 
calculated. 

For instance, for non-inductive load, or 6' = 0, equation (68), 
solved for e, gives 

e = ^^~ - x\x",i} + eo ^^' + x,"H'' {x'\ - x\y - ri. (82) 

202. As illustrations are shown, in Fig. 142, the regulation 
curves, with the terminal voltage, e, as ordinates, and the cur- 
rent, i, as abscissas, at constant field-excitation, that is, constant 
nominal generated e.m.f., eo, for the constants 

Co = 2500 volts; x'o =10 ohms; 

r = 1 ohm; x'\ = 4 ohms; 

for non-inductive load E = e, (Curve I.) 

and for inductive load of 60 per cent, power-factor, E = e (0.6 -\- 
0.8 j.) (Curve II.) 

For comparison are plotted in the same figure, in dotted 
lines, the regulation curves for constant synchronous reactance 

Xo = 10 ohms, 

that is, for the same open-circuit voltage and same short-circuit 
current. 

As seen from Fig. 142, the difference between the two regula- 
tion curves, for variable and for constant synchronous reactance, 
is quite considerable at non-inductive load, but practically negli- 
gible at highly inductive load. This is to be expected, since at 
inductive load the armature current reaches its maximum nearly 
in opposition to the field-poles, and in this direction the syn- 
chronous reactance is the same, x'o, as at short-circuit. 

In the preceding discussion of the alternator with variable syn- 
chronous reactance, e.m.f. and current are assumed as sine 
waves. The periodic variation of reactance produces, however, 
a distortion of wave-shape, consisting mainly of a third harmonic 
which superimposes on the fundamental, as discussed in Chapter 
XXV. The preceding, therefore, applies to the equivalent 


ARMATURE REACTIONS OF ALTERNATORS 291 

sine wave, which represents approximately the actual distorted 
wave. 

As the intensity, and the phase difference between the third 
harmonic and the fundamental changes with the load, in such 


2600 
2400 
2200 
2000 
1800 
1600 

</) 1400 

H 
_1 

> 1200 
1000 
800 
600 
400 
200 
0 


"^ 

s 

\, 

""^^ 

"^^ 

^ 

^ 

^ 
^ 

-V 

"^N 

^ 

i' 

\ 

V 

n 

\ 

11' 

V 

\ 

V 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 
\ 

V 

\ 

^ 

\ 

\ 
\ 

\ 

\ 
\ 
\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

''^ 

\ 

^ 

^ 

20 40 CO 80 100 120 110 100 180 200 220 240 260 

AMPERES 

Fig. 142. 

an alternator of pulsating synchronous reactance, the wave-shape 
of the machine changes more or less with the load and the char- 
acter of the load.
